Docs 2.0 content technical review (#676)
graknlabs/docs: 0001-typedb/03-admin/05-security.md

Reviewer: @jamesreprise : Please perform technical review.

---
pageTitle: Security features
keywords: typedb, security, auth, authentication, encryption, vulnerability
longTailKeywords: TypeDB security, user authentication, data encryption
summary: TypeDB high availability guarantees and solution.
toc: false
---

# Security features

<div class="note">
[Note]
Most of the security features are available only in TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

## Access control

<div class="note">
[Note]
Access control features are a part of TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

TypeDB Cloud has the following security features:

* [Discretionary access control](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discretionary_access_control),
* User account management,
* User identification and authentication,
* Password hashing with salt,

> * Password complexity requirements settings.

Reviewer 2: as well as password expiration

Author: When it was released?

Author: Looks like TypeDB Cluster v.2.16.1 ?

Author: ```suggestion
* Password complexity requirements and expiration settings.
```

> ### User authentication

Reviewer: @lolski : Please help with these next few subsections.

> All external connections to a cluster of TypeDB Cloud require a user account credentials. Not for a user account 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All external connections to a cluster of TypeDB Cloud require user account credentials. Not for a user account 
```

> used in the TypeDB Cloud web portal but a user account from the TypeDB Cloud cluster we are connecting to.

Reviewer 2: are we still using the term 'cluster', even in lowercase (not the product name)?

Author: What would you call a bunch of servers with replication between them?
Nobody banned the word, it's just not a product name anymore.

Users can use usernames and passwords to identify and authenticate themselves. Passwords are stored only as 
irreversible **password hash + salt**.

Administrators can adjust settings for **password strength requirements** and reset users passwords.

### User management

<div class="note">
[Note]
User management features are a part of TypeDB Cloud.
</div>

Use [TypeDB Console](../../02-clients/02-console.md) or Client API to manage users. To connect to TypeDB with TypeDB 

> Console provide a username and password:

Author: ```suggestion
Console provide a username and password (when prompted):
```

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash

> typedb console --cluster=<address> --username=<username> --password=<password>

Reviewer 2: TypeDB Console will prompt for a password when the password flag is used without a value. This is more ideal as it won't leave the password value in the shell history.
```suggestion
typedb console --cluster=<address> --username=<username> --password
```

```

<div class="note">
[Important]

> Use the Administrators account to be able to manage users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `admin` account to manage users.
```

</div>

Use the following TypeDB Console commands to manage users.

Retrieve a list of all users:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash
user list
```

Create a new user:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash

> user create <username> <password>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
user create <username>
```

We don't want to save the passwords in the prompt history, so we've removed the ability to create users and supply the password in the same line.

```

Delete a user:

<!-- test-ignore -->
```bash
user delete <username>
```

## Encryption

> TypeDB and TypeDB Cloud encrypts all network traffic: 

Reviewer 2: TypeDB (the one found at vaticle/typedb) does not encrypt any network traffic.

TypeDB Cloud should encrypt everything by default, but we should check before we make this claim.

Author: ```suggestion
TypeDB Cloud encrypts all network traffic: 
```

* TLS encryption is used for client/server communication.
* CurveZMQ is used for cluster communication (TypeDB Cloud only).

## Cluster security

TypeDB Cloud cluster accepts external communications only with valid credentials and internal cluster communications 
only from servers that are set to be part of the cluster.

All external and internal communications are [encrypted](#encryption) on the fly. 

> Additional connection security is achieved by using a CA certificate in the TLS encryption of Clients connections 

Reviewer 2: Users may be able to choose to supply their own root certificate, but assuming this is a drop in replacement with the exact same algorithm and key size, this won't improve security.

Author: There are multiple ways of improving security. By providing your own certificate you mostly eliminate the risk of the OS certificates being compromised. There are additional risks of your own certificate being compromised tho. We can't asses which one is bigger in general case. Hence we can improve security with this feature but it's not guaranteed that we will =).

```suggestion
Additional connection security can be achieved by using a specified CA certificate in the TLS encryption of Clients connections 
```

> Additional connection security can be achieved by using a specified CA certificate in the TLS encryption of Clients connections 
> (optional). 
> 
> If no certificate is provided then the default operating system root certificates will be used to establish TLS 
> encryption. Set the certificate explicitly to be able to use a self-signed certificate or to avoid using 
> default certificates from operating system.

Author: ```suggestion
Set a CA certificate explicitly to be able to use a self-signed certificate or to avoid using 
default certificates from an operating system.
If no certificate is provided then the default operating system root certificates will be used to establish TLS 
encryption. 
```

> default certificates from operating system.

Reviewer 2: This section is perfect, we should leave this as is and remove the above sentence in my opinion.

Author: "If no certificate is provided..." sounds a bit out of thin air that way, don't you think? I suggested changes to the statement above to improve it a bit.

Reviewer 2: I'm quite sure we can't claim that any additional security is gained by specifying our own root CA in the abstract. Let's just say that you can specify your own root CA.
